 
Citation: Emili, E., A. Lyapustin, Y. Wang, C. Popp, S. Korkin, M. Zebisch, S. Wunderle, and M. Petitta (2011), High spatial resolution aerosol retrieval with MAIAC: Application to mountain regions, J. Geophys. Res. , 116 , D23211, doi:10.1029/2011JD016297.


[ 2 ] Aerosols have an impact on the climate which is not yet well understood and quantified [ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , 2007]. Aerosols also affect human health [ Brunekreef and Holgate , 2002] and the range of activities through alteration of visibility [ Wang et al. , 2009]. The European Alpine region (Figure 1) is a densely populated mountain area with consistent sources of anthropogenic aerosol emissions from traffic, industries and home heating

[ Gehrig and Buchmann , 2003]. The concentration of popu-lation and major European transport routes along the main valleys, which are relatively narrow ( ∼ 2 ‐ 5 km) and have rather steep mountain slopes, together with the local meteo-rology [ Gohm et al. , 2009], create specific forcing conditions that result in very heterogeneous aerosol distribution with scales of variability of several kilometers. Aerosol monitoring in those regions requires data with high spatial resolution. Networks of ground ‐ based measurements such as air ‐ quality stations [ European Environmental Agency , 2009] or Sun photometers [ Holben et al. , 1998] provide accurate informa-tion (aerosol mass and optical depth/properties, respectively) at specific sites with high temporal resolution but they lack a needed continuous spatial coverage. The determination of the aerosol spatial and temporal distribution remains challenging from the modeling point of view [ Cuvelier et al. , 2007], because of relatively short lifetimes of aerosols, high vari-ability of species, sources, sinks and physical ‐ chemical transformations.


3 NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, USA. 4 GEST, University of Maryland Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

5 Empa, Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology, Dübendorf, Switzerland. 6 GESTAR, Universities Space Rese arch Association, Columbia, Maryland, USA. Copyright 2011 by the American Geophysical Union. 0148 ‐ 0227/11/2011JD016297

JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH, VOL. 116, D23211, doi:10.1029/2011JD016297 , 2011 D23211 1of 12

[ Yu et al. , 2006] and geostationary platforms [ Prados et al. , 2007; Popp et al. , 2007]. The Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) onboard the polar orbiting TERRA and AQUA satellites provides a global daily cov-erage at the equator per instrument and a higher coverage toward the poles. The standard MODIS aerosol product (MOD04 for TERRA, MYD04 for AQUA) is provided by the Dark Target algorithm [ Kaufman et al. , 1997; Levy et al. , 2007], which is complemented with the Deep Blue algorithm [ Hsu et al. , 2006] to allow retrievals over bright surfaces including deserts. Both these products, which have a spatial resolution of 10 km, are intended for continental/ global applications. Given that the nadir resolution of MODIS bands used in the Dark Target algorithm is 500 m, the choice of 10 km resolution over land improves the MO(Y)D04 product quality by suppressing the pixel ‐ level noise of the retrievals due to residual snow, clouds/cloud shadows, variable surface brightness etc. On the other hand, this also reduces the data coverage especially in mountain regions partially covered by snow (see Figures 2 and 3) and does not allow detecting the fine scale local emission sources or resolve inhomogeneities at scales of several kilometers, a typical width of the Alpine valleys.

[ 4 ] Data coverage is a key point for both real ‐ time and climatological applications [ Emili et al. , 2010; Riffler et al. , 2010]. A high spatial resolution is important where aerosols have a fine scale variability (e.g., in the Alpine valleys) and is required for the detection of aerosol sources and affected areas (traffic roads, cities).

[ 5 ] Several approaches to derive aerosol optical depth (AOD) from MODIS at high resolution have been proposed in the recent years [ Chengcai et al. , 2005; Wong et al. , 2010]. They provide new opportunities for regional scale analysis, but application of these algorithms remains confined to a Figure 1. Digital Elevation Model (DEM) for the region of interest [ GLOBE Task Team et al. , 1999]. The red and white squares denote the location of the AERONET sites used to validate the AOD (Ispra, Davos and Laegeren from south to north). Transparent yellow boxes show two subregions enlarged in Figure 5. Blue squares denote the regions enlarged in Figure 6.

Figure 2. Examples of MAIAC maps for (top to bottom) three days in 2008 for the region of interest in Figure 1. From left to right: RGB image, Cloud ‐ Snow ‐ Water ‐ CvR mask, MAIAC AOD ( l = 0.55 m m), MAIAC AOD after the filtering described in Section 2.2. The boxes and circles in the third day highlight the occurrence of enhanced AOD close to clouds edges. few studies. Recently, the Multiangle Implementation of Atmospheric Correction (MAIAC) [ Lyapustin et al. , 2011a] algorithm was developed for MODIS which performs a simultaneous retrieval of surface Bidirectional Reflection Function (BRDF) and aerosol properties at a resolution of 1 km, which is very appealing for the Alpine region (see Figure 2). This algorithm has a global scope, works over both dark and bright surfaces and it has an internal cloud mask and snow detection.

[ 6 ] In the current work we present the first applications of MAIAC data to map aerosols in the populated mountain area. We validate and apply MAIAC retrievals to compute statistics of aerosol spatial distribution in the European Alps. This study assesses the potential of high spatial resolution satellite data in regions with spatially heterogeneous aerosols.

[ 7 ] This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 intro-duces MAIAC products and compares MAIAC to MOD04 spatial coverage for the Alpine region. Because of unre-solved clouds, snow etc., the 1 km AOD data have a higher noise in partly cloudy/snow conditions. Section 3 describes a set of filters developed for noise suppression. The direct validation of MAIAC AOD with AERONET measurements and comparison with MO(Y)D04 product for 3 mountain and valley sites is presented in Section 4. The consistency of aerosol patterns retrieved by MAIAC is also compared with ground ‐ based aerosol mass measurements (PM 10 ) from the spatially denser air ‐ quality network. Finally, Section 5 describes AOD distribution along with statistics of cloud and snow cover in the Alpine area for the examined period of 2008 – 2009, and compares these data with available long ‐ term statistics for the European Alps.


[ 8 ] The region of interest and its topography are depicted in Figure 1. The following data have been used in this study: MAIAC products, MODIS (MOD04, MYD04) Collection 5.1 AOD [ Levy et al. , 2007], spectral AOD from Sun photometers (AERONET) [ Holben et al. , 1998] and ground measurements of particulate matter (PM 10 , density of particles with a diameter smaller than 10 m m) from the Swiss [ Schiess , 2008] and South Tyrol Environmental Agencies.

[ 9 ] The suit of MAIAC products includes cloud (cloud shadow) mask, dynamic land ‐ water ‐ snow mask, column water vapor, aerosol optical depth at 0.47 m m and ratio of volumetric concentrations of the coarse and fine mode fractions (CvR) in a set of discrete values (CvR = 0, 0.6, 1.2, 2, 3, 5, e.g., CvR = 0 for pure fine mode), from which the corresponding fine mode fraction product of the Collection 5 algorithm can be com-puted. The aerosol models (fine and coarse modes) are specified regionally using a lognormal size distribution. The East Coast model, which is representative of continental aerosol properties (see Lyapustin et al. [2011a] for a detailed description), was used for the Alpine area. MAIAC land products include spectral bidirectional reflectance factor (BRF), parameters of the BRDF model and surface albedo. For the snow covered pixels, MAIAC provides a sub ‐ pixel snow fraction and a snow grain size related to snow albedo. The products are available in a gridded format at 1 km reso-lution. MAIAC algorithm is based on time series analysis and combines a pixel ‐ and imagery ‐ level processing for fixed blocks of 25 × 25 1 km pixels. The general idea behind the algorithm is that surface properties change rapidly in space and rather slowly in time, while the opposite generally holds true for the aerosols. Based on this idea, MAIAC uses up to 16 consecutive days of measurements for the fixed 25 km blocks to separate surface contribution and derive surface BRDF at 1 km resolution. With the surface BRDF known at several wavelengths, the aerosol properties are retrieved from the latest MODIS observation at 1 km resolution [ Lyapustin et al. , 2011b, 2011a]. A similar idea is used in the MAIAC cloud mask based on the notion that the spatial structure of the image is highly reproducible in consecutive observations from space in clear ‐ sky conditions, whereas clouds usually introduce random disturbances [ Lyapustin et al. , 2008]. MAIAC AOD retrieval over water pixels is disregarded in this study and, if not else specified, MODIS TERRA and

Figure 3. MODIS Collection 5.1 AOD (Optical_Depth_ Land_And_Ocean data set) for the acquisitions in Figure 2. Lower spatial coverage than for MAIAC AOD (Figure 2) is observed during winter days while coverage is similar for both algorithms in summer. AQUA data are treated without distinction. Below, both Collection 5.1 standard AOD product (Optical_Depth_ Land_And_Ocean) and MAIAC AOD are considered at the wavelength of 0.55 m m. 2.1. Examples of MAIAC Products [ 10 ] Figure 2 shows three different examples of the MAIAC products including cloud/snow/CvR mask and AOD. Figure 2 (top) and Figure 2 (middle) represent two winter days, a period when stable atmospheric conditions with temperature inversion often lead to accumulation of aerosols in the shallow boundary layer. The observation geometry is close to nadir on the first day and the view angle is close to the edge of scan on the second day resulting in lower effective spatial resolution (up to 2 km). Snow cover has a wide extent on these days but low Alpine valleys appear to be snow free in the MAIAC snow mask. Figure 2 (bottom) represents a mid summer day with greener surface and reduced snow cover at high elevations. Corresponding plots of the standard MODIS Collection 5.1 AOD product for each of the three days are shown in Figure 3. The first look at the MAIAC AOD product (Figure 2, third column) reveals the potential of the high resolution data: for example, sharp and well defined boundaries are well distinguished in the aerosol distribution due to the blocking effect of topog-raphy, which during the cold seasons prevents particle transport from aerosol sources to rural elevated areas (see Figure 1). The second day features clear conditions north of the Alps and overcast conditions in the south. Notably there is a clear presence of high AOD outliers with values above 0.5 in the Alpine valleys due to undetected sub ‐ pixel snow contamination which may be amplified by lower spatial res-olution at the edge of scan. This problem, however, persists at all view geometries on the border of snow covered areas. On the summer day, high AOD values can be observed in the vicinity of clouds (see boxed regions). At 1 km resolution, they may represent thin cloud formation/dissipation layers or sub ‐ pixel cloudy patches undetected by the cloud mask algorithm. As a rule, many of such pixels on the border with clouds also have “ coarser ” particles as shown by a high CvR value (CvR > 2) whereas the typical background aerosols are characterized by CvR = 0 − 2.

[ 11 ] These examples reveal some of the difficulties inher-ent to AOD retrieval in regions with persistent snow and clouds, which become particularly prominent at the high spatial resolution. At coarser resolution, the MODIS standard Collection 5 algorithm relies on statistical filtering rejecting the low 20% and high 50% percentile of the histogram dis-tribution, thus avoiding the most problematic pixels, at the cost of degraded resolution. While snow contamination is clearly a surface artifact to be removed, high optical depth close to clouds can be a consequence of unaccounted 3D radiative transfer effects near cloud edges [ Wen et al. , 2006] or a real signal due to modification of aerosol optical prop-erties in condensation/evaporation layers [ Koren et al. , 2007]. For this reason, an interpretation of “ problematic ” pixels near the clouds clearly depends on the specific application: for the air pollution and aerosol climatology analysis, these pixels represent high AOD outliers which need to be filtered during post ‐ processing. A comparison of MAIAC AOD with AERONET (Section 3.1) confirms an

occasional AOD overestimation along cloud and snow edges providing an additional motivation to the development of the outlier filter. 2.2. AOD Filtering [ 12 ] A mixed threshold ‐ spatial filter has been developed and applied to MAIAC AOD in this work. As mentioned before, high AOD values occur mainly in the immediate vicinity of clouds and snow. In case of undetected or sub ‐ pixel clouds, MAIAC typically produces high CvR values, indicating effectively larger particles.

[ 13 ] Thus, the first filter rejects high CvR values (CvR > 2). The high CvR values, shown by the orange color in the second image of each row (Figure 2), are clearly visible on 16 February and 31 July in Figure 2 around edges of thick and bright clouds. The bottom image also shows several cases of semi ‐ transparent sub ‐ visible clouds, marked by boxes, which were undetected by the cloud mask algorithm but were captured by the aerosol algorithm as high CvR ‐ high AOD values.

[ 14 ] A second filter is based on the proximity to the detected clouds (or pixels with CvR > 2) and snow. Koren et al. [2007] quantified the effect of enhanced AOD close to cloud borders to decay (e ‐ folding) in ∼ 10 km. The CvR does not always capture undetected clouds, especially in case of low (<0.4) AOD (circles in Figure 2). The second filter works as follows: for each pixel, the value of AOD is rejected if the percentage of cloud/high CvR or snow in the sur-rounding 15 × 15 (7 × 7 for snow) pixels is higher than 20% (5% for snow). The filter serves to remove pixels within ∼ 10 km of the detected cloud edges. The snow proximity filter similarly removes pixels contaminated by residual snow which generally occur at smaller distance from the detected snow borders ( ∼ 1 ‐ 2 km; see Figure 2).

[ 15 ] Besides CvR, the two described filters rely on the MAIAC cloud and snow mask. They will fail if the mask is not successful, which makes it necessary to introduce an additional independent filter. The third filter is based on a spatial standard deviation of AOD ( s ), widely used in aerosol algorithms [e.g., Popp et al. , 2007; Riffler et al. , 2010]. The s ‐ test relies on the assumption that AOD fields are spatially smooth with limited variance and that high variations are caused by the surface artifacts or undetected clouds/snow. The s ‐ test is performed as follows: for each 1 km pixel, the average AOD and its standard deviation are computed for a surrounding 3 × 3 pixels window. If s is lower than a fixed threshold of 0.05, the average AOD value is assigned to the pixel. If s > 0.05, then the highest AOD value in 3 × 3 area is removed and statistics are recomputed. The AOD of the central pixel is considered to be non ‐ valid if more than half of pixels (highest AOD values) were removed. In this way, the AOD field is smoothed to the spatial resolution of 2 – 3 km, which remains significantly higher than 10 km resolution of MOD04 product but allows to effectively suppress the retrieval noise.

[ 16 ] The threshold values for the percentage of cloud/ snow contamination and s were established experimentally based on visual analysis of AOD images, average reduction in data coverage and statistics of matching with AERONET measurements (Section 3.1). For example, a s threshold of 0.05 was found to provide the highest reduction of the MAIAC AOD Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) without considerable reduction of the number of retrievals. Although the exact choice of the filter parameters is based on the validation statistics for the region of interest, the proposed post ‐ processing is of interest for other regions, as demon-strated by independent validation in non ‐ Alpine sites (Section 3.1).

[ 17 ] The resulting reduction of noise is clearly visible in Figure 2 from comparison of the original AOD with filtered AOD, shown in the third and fourth columns, respectively. The developed filter effectively removes AOD artifacts due to unresolved snow and clouds while preserving the main spatial features of the AOD field. The loss of data points as a result of filtering is between 25% and 39% of the originally retrieved AOD pixels for the three cases. Some of the high AOD pixels in the cloud formation/dissipation zone pass the filter selection (Figure 2 (middle) and Figure 2 (bottom)) because they do not satisfy the conditions of the proposed filtering. Interestingly, MOD04 Collection 5 algorithm (with standard product quality flag) also keeps those pixels (Figure 3, bottom). However, the pattern of these high AOD pixels that pass the filtering is random in space and time so that their impact can be minimized using outlier resistant statistics for the climatological averages (median and per-centiles, Section 4).


3.1. Comparison With AERONET [ 18 ] Validation of satellite aerosol retrieval is commonly